CI/CD for Database Deployments
Introduction
Since the table is missing in PROD, the next step is to synchronize the two environments. Traditionally, this would mean manually applying changes to the production database, a process prone to errors and inconsistencies. However, with SQLcl's project command, we can automate this process, making database changes faster, safer, and more reliable. This is where CI/CD principles come into play, bringing the same efficiency and consistency of modern application deployment pipelines to database management.

Database cicd logo

Focus on the Process

Remember, the main goal of this workshop is to understand the principles of database development and deployment using project command in SQLcl and CI/CD practices, regardless of the technology used in the application.

Estimated Lab Time: 15 minutes

Objectives
Utilize SQLcl to manage and deploy database changes.
Deploy database changes to the production environment and verify application functionality.
Practice and apply SQLcl's project commands.
Gain hands-on experience with database CI/CD and understand its benefits.
Prerequisites
Completion of previous labs
Basic understanding of Git
Collapse All Tasks
Task 1: Export Database Changes (project export)
First, you have to be connect to DEV_USER in SQLcl and make sure you are in the application folder
/home/assets/assets/workshops/sqlcl-projects-react-app.

Copy
sql dev_user/$DBPASSWORD@"$DBCONNECTION"
Copy
cd /home/assets/assets/workshops/sqlcl-projects-react-app
Note: You must be in the project folder (in your case sqlcl-projects-react-app is your project/application folder) to execute project commands; otherwise, an error will occur.
Before exporting, create a new git branch from main branch and switch to it for this feature:

Copy
!git branch
Copy
!git checkout -b Ticket-1-Departments
Create and checkout to the departments feature branch

Export Database Objects:

Execute the following command to export the departments table database object to the application folder:

Copy
project export -objects DEPARTMENTS -verbose
Run project export command

Find the exported departments table inside the database folder under src/database/dev_user/tables.

Database folder location

Double click on the 'departments.sql' to see its content.

Departments.sql file content

Task 2: Stage Changes (project stage)
Stage Changes:

Add and commit changes before stage

Copy
!git status
Copy
!git add --all
Copy
!git status
Copy
!git commit -m "Export departments table"
Add and commit changes

Execute the following command to stage the changes for release

Copy
project stage -verbose
Run project stage command

Add custom scripts

You can add custom scripts using the add-custom sub-command of the stage command.

Add the custom file to the stage

Copy
project stage add-custom -file-name dept-data.sql -verbose
Run project stage add-custom

This will create a custom sql file in the dist/_custom folder.

Navigate to the scripts folder

Navigate to scripts folder

Copy the insert statements from departments_table.sql

Copy the inserts

Locate the newly created dept_data.sql file

The file can be found at:

sqlcl-projects-react-app/dist/releases/next/changes/Ticket-1-Departments/_custom/dept-data.sql

Custom file location

Open the dept-data.sql file and paste the insert statements

Double-click the file and paste the copied inserts inside and save it (Command + S or Ctrl + S).

Insert data in the custom script

Important: Add the COMMIT statement at the end of the dept-data.sql file.

Copy
COMMIT
Add and commit:

Copy
!git add --all
Copy
!git commit -m "Add stage files"
Commit stage files

Merge to main branch:

Copy
!git checkout main
Copy
!git merge Ticket-1-Departments
Merge branch with main 

Task 3: Release Changes (project release)
Once your changes are merged into the main branch, execute the following command to create a second release:

Copy
project release -version 2.0.0 -verbose
Run project release command

Add and commit

Copy
!git add --all
Copy
!git commit -m "Release 2.0.0"
Task 4: Generate Deployable Artifact (project gen-artifact)
Before generating the artifact, you need to return the install.sql file to its initial state containing lb update.

Open the dist/install.sql file

Open install.sql file

Go to line 17 and replace lb changelog-sync with lb update

Replace lb changelog-sync with lb update

Save the install.sql file by pressing Cmd + S on Mac or Ctrl + S on Windows/Linux.

Add and commit.

Copy
!git add --all
Copy
!git status
Git add the installer file

Copy
!git commit -m "updated installer to do an update"
Run project gen-artifact

Copy
project gen-artifact -verbose
Run project gen-artifact command

If you go back to the artifact folder, you will find a new artifact generated.

Navigate to the artifact folder

Task 5: Deploying to Production (project deploy)
Connect to the Production Database:

Establish a connection to the production database using SQLcl.

Use the connect command with the PROD_USER credentials.

Copy
connect PROD_USER/[PASSWORD]
Connect to PROD_USER

Deploy Changes to Production:

Execute the following command to deploy the changes to the production database:

Copy
project deploy -file artifact/HrManager-2.0.0.zip  -verbose
Run project deploy command

This command applies the changes defined in the release artifact to the production database without recreating existing schema objects.

If you check now you find the departments table in the PROD_USER. But what are the other tables ?

Find departments table in PROD_USER

Enable REST Endpoints

To expose the Departments table in PROD_USER as a REST endpoint, follow the same steps you performed for DEV_USER in Lab 2 → Task 3.

Open Database Actions
Connect as PROD_USER
Locate the Departments table, right-click on it.
Select REST, then click Enable.


Run the Production Application:

Restart the application using the production environment variables.
Verify that the "Departments" feature is functioning correctly in the production environment.
Perform thorough testing to ensure that all aspects of the feature are working as expected.


The department section should look like this:

Departments data appearing in the app

You did it! You have successfully implemented and deployed the "Departments" feature and released the version 2 of the application using SQLcl and CICD practices. You have gained valuable experience in managing database changes, automating deployments, and working with a CICD pipeline.

After you gain this some experience, it's time for some challenges! Head to the next lab and take your skills to the next level!

You may now proceed to the next lab

Learn More
Oracle SQLcl Doc
Oracle SQLcl Project & CI/CD Docs
Oracle SQLcl Liquibase Docs
Video overview and demonstration for SQLcl Projects
Acknowledgements
Author - Fatima AOURGA & Abdelilah AIT HAMOU, Junior Members of The Technical Staff, Database Tooling, SQLcl developers
Created By/Date - Fatima AOURGA & Abdelilah AIT HAMOU, Software Developers, February 2025