Unveiling the Analytics Feature (Release 3.0.0)
Introduction
You’ve just completed the "Departments" feature and deployed it successfully. But wait, it's time for an even bigger challenge: Unleashing the Analytics Engine!

In this phase, you will release version 3 (V3) of the HR application. This new feature will offer insights not only into employee and department data but also provide valuable analytics on attendance and performance reviews, helping you visualize employee engagement and productivity.

The Analytics feature was always planned but left inactive in the initial release. Now, Tech Solutions Company is ready to bring it to life, and it’s up to you to make it happen!

The Challenge: Unlock this page

Analytics page working

This lab has a game-challenge approach. First, you'll get an overview of the goal. Try to solve it on your own! If you need help, you'll get a hint. Still stuck? A step-by-step solution will guide you through.

Estimated Lab Time: 15 minutes

Objectives
Assess your understanding of the project feature from previous labs and reinforce your knowledge
Enable the Analytics feature
Release the version 3 of the database and the application
Overcome all the challenges successfully
Prerequisites
Complete successfully the previous labs
Bring on the challenge! Let’s crush it!

Collapse All Tasks
Task 1: Implement Analytics Page
When you check the Analytics page, you will find it locked, not working. In this challenge you will unlock it.

Analytics page not working

Before making changes, we need to switch back to the development environment. To do this, update the .env file by changing prod_user to dev_user, ensuring the application connects to the development database.

Now, let's modify the application code to enable the Analytics page.

Challenge: Identify and update the necessary code to bring the Analytics page to life.
Hint
Solution
Task 2: Apply Database Changes & Enable ORDS Endpoints
Your task is to update the database by adding the performancereviews and attendance tables to DEV_USER.

Challenge: Create the necessary database tables (attendance and performancereviews) to support the "Analytics" feature.
Hint
Solution
Task 3: Deploy The Database Changes To The Target Database
Our target database in this case is the PROD_USER schema (production database), though it could be any other database.

To deploy changes, we will follow the SQLcl Projects workflow, just like in the previous lab.

The project is already initialized, we will now directly export the desired objects using project export.

Challenge: Deploy to production (PROD_USER)
Hint
Solution
Task 4: Final Step
There is no Challenge 4 :) , you've reached the end of this workshop (^_^) and this journey. We’d like to say you:

Congratulations, Developer! You've successfully navigated this challenging lab and created a valuable system for this Tech Solutions Company. By completing the labs , you've demonstrated a strong understanding of database development, version control, and deployment practices. You've also gained valuable experience with SQLcl and its powerful project management capabilities.

This lab has equipped you with the essential skills to effectively develop and deploy database-driven features within a real-world application environment. Keep practicing and exploring new challenges, and continue to enhance your skills as a skilled developer.

Learn More
Oracle SQLcl Doc
Oracle SQLcl Project & CI/CD Docs
Oracle SQLcl Liquibase Docs
Video overview and demonstration for SQLcl Projects
Acknowledgements
Author - Fatima AOURGA & Abdelilah AIT HAMOU, Junior Members of The Technical Staff, Database Tooling, SQLcl developers
Created By/Date - Fatima AOURGA & Abdelilah AIT HAMOU, Software Developers, February 2025